---
layout: post
title:  "Touch typing training and improvements"
date:   2013-10-16
categories: 
---

I have taught myself touch typing some 5 years ago. Before that I was like many typing in a hunt and peck fashion. This was definitely not productive at all and obviously not fast.

Then one day I decided to learn touch typing. I wanted to be fast when typing any kind of text on a computer, be it email, code, or any kind of document. So I learned touch typing by myself with the help of GnuTypist. This is a little command line program, completely unfancy, but it does the job. It walks you through how to position your hands on a keyboard and which finger should be used to hit which key.

After some days (or weeks) of daily practice I sure enough learned how to touch type and that was a big improvement. Not having to look at your keyboard when you are typing is so pleasant and confortable.

I remember back at University one of my teacher telling us that we are not supposed to become secretaries and therefore typing fast is not something to aim for. At this time I was agreeing with him, thinking that we are supposed to be clever and to be able to think when we write program. Typing fast was really of no use. Well I was so wrong, and so my teacher. You see when you work with computer, being a programmer, a clark, a secretary or a student, you will have to type some text at end on your computer. You can think of yourself has having a job requiring thinking and deep analysis but at the end you will still have to instruct the computer about your thoughts and type them down. So yes definitely touch typing is something every one working with a computer on a daily basis must learn. And I am convinced now that it is a skill that must be taught at school. It has become like writing and counting, a basic skill that many people must master in order to be efficient in our current world. 

Just think of it a moment: how much text do you type on a daily basis on a keyboard? All those emails, documents, twits, pages of code, command at the terminal and so on. This is just something you constantly do when working on a computer. You type, type, type and type again. True sometime you stop typing and read a bit but let's be honest you must type a lot.

After I taught myself to touch type I then stop practicing. I was thinking that typing all day long on a computer would be enough practice so that my accuracy and speed would increase by itself as time goes by.

Seems like I was wrong once again. Even though I learned touch typing I actually didn't become good at it. My speed was between 50 and 60 words, more often in the lower end of this range. My accuracy was also quite poor I must admit. I was simply just doing too many mistakes when typing. Strangely the error rate was increasing when someone was sitting next to me. I guess the little pressure or stress generated by knowing that someone was watching at me was enough to destabilise me and increase my error rate to the point that the person watching may have thought that I should actually learn touch typing seriously. Fortunately for me, it was not that often that some one was looking over my shoulder and so it was not a real impediment to my work.

Anyway, we could say that I was an average touch typer. Someone that did the effort to learn how to do it but never past the point were text was just flowing out of his finger at an impressive level.

Recently I decided that I wanted to change that. If I want to be productive I must increase my touch typing speed and accuracy. If I want to write a blog post every day I must be able to do that without taking hours to write a blog post. This must be an easy and fast process.

So I went back to the class room, so to speak, and decided to work on my speed and accuracy. I found a website proposing touch typing challenges that could help me in my quest. The web site [10 fast fingers][10-fast-fingers] is really helping me out. I have started practicing with it maybe 2 weeks ago and I already can notice some good improvements.

The principles of the website is very simple. The application present you a list of words that you have to type as fast as possible with as few mistakes as possible. Once you have finish typing all words it shows you the stats of your typing. In addition to that the words that you have to type are chosen accordingly to the frequency of their usage in the language. This is very good as you are very likely to have to type these words a few hundreds of time per week. So by typing them again and again you start to build really good muscle memory at typing those words and therefore increasing your typing speed and accuracy. You can also choose which language you'd like to practice which makes it really nice if you are a french or a spanish speaker.

When I started practicing, the application confirmed that my speed was oscillating between 50 and 60 words per minute. Most of the time it was below 55 words. Not great, is it? After two weeks of practicing with it I have already increased my speed to be over 60 words per minute with the fastest session being clocked at 72 word per minute. This is starting to be not too bad. I usually practive for 15 to 30 minutes a day. I have already notice at work during the day that my typing was better. It was faster and with less mistake. Big win.

Now the final goal of all that is not to be the fastest touch typer on earth. But I am determined to reach 80 words per minute. This is my goal and this is some kind of barely legal level for a descent touch typer. So even with that I won't be a world class touch typer, far from that. But I would have reached a point where words would pour out of my fingers easily, fastly and accurately. So let's make an appointement in about 30 days and check were I will be by then.

[10-fast-fingers]: http://10fastfingers.com/
